# Monokai focus

I love Monokai for its visual pleasantness and consistency, but it does seem to color tokens non-semantically.

This theme is a principled fork of Monokai that keeps background colors and general colorimetry but chooses foreground colors in a principled way, based on what tokens mean in a file.

Monokai is fine, but as I started according more attention to the actual color and styles, I realized how much signal my brain has to throws away and ignore when reading the code. Clutter. Visual noise. This theme aims to minimize it.

1. Minimize color churn: the number of times the foreground color changes in construct.
2. Color only what is unambiguous, rest stays white (fg). This means symbolic operators are fg in a language where they are already syntactically distinct from everything else.
3. Use semantically meaningful colors.

Italics are used, as an orthogonal semantics applied to everything "parameter": labels assigned to information received from outside a construct. Function parameters, type parameters, catch variables.

Semantic highlighting is used, but only when it provides a meaningful disambiguation. The rarest or most powerful version should be colored.

For instance, for constants and mutable variables, mutable variables should be colored, while constants are in fg.

## Theme JSON generation

The color-theme.json file is generated by the color-theme.ts script.

It defines composable primitives and compiles them to a canonical, sorted theme file.

Difficulty is

- Scopes are conventional and vary per language
- VSCode TextMate theming grammar is limited and does not support useful constructs like
  - negation
  - parent selectors
  - combinatorial structures (markdown bold + italic)
  - this requires adding more rules than necessary

Objective: define a minimal map from scope => style
Compiler builds theme file

The primitive: binding. A scope => style association that is always effective. The compiler must errors in case of conflict between two bindings.

### Scopes

scopes are declared using a syntaxless data structure:

```ts
scope: Scope = s('keyword', ['flow', 'other'], 'ts') // (string | string[])[]
// keyword.flow.ts
// keyword.other.ts
```

The scope syntax must be expressive enough that authored definitions only need to be positive, and never need to reset anything.

The empty string is supported:

```ts
s('keyword', ['flow', ''], 'ts')
// keyword.flow.ts
// keyword.ts
```

Scopes are deduplicated before the next compilation phase.
